---
title: Types and Context
date: 2023-09-04
description: Some ideas on advancing Typst.
---

This blog post discusses some ideas about we could make Typst simpler and more
expressive. In particular, it talks about custom elements, types, introspection,
and "get rules".

## Elements
Typst has the concept of _elements_ that encode semantical entities in a
document: Things like a figure, an image, but also just text are elements. The
structure of a document is defined by a tree of elements and different concrete
presentations can be derived from this tree through show rules. Morover, Typst
has the concept of an _element function,_ which is basically a constructor for
an element. (This concept is not really explained in the documentation and
sometimes a source of confusion.)

Why do we need elements and show rules though? Can't we just have functions that
directly produce visual output? The answer is decoupling: By separately defining
the semantic model of an entity (as an element) and its visual presentation
(through a show rule), we can display the same semantic element in different
ways, through different show rules, and thereby separate _content_ from
_presentation._  We also have different options on how we want to achieve this:
(1) We can write separate sets of show rules for different targets. This is
similar to having different CSS files for the same document. (2) We can write a
single unified set of show rules that internally uses if conditionals to check
which output format we are targeting. This a more akin to media queries.

Apart from separation of concerns, elements give us interoperability: A heading
created by package A can be styled through a show rule defined by package B.
This directly motivates custom elements: Why should the set of semantical
entites be restricted to built-in elements? A library-defined entity benefits
just as much from separation of concerns and interoperability as a built-in one.

However, there are no custom elements in Typst at the moment. Instead, packages
use functions for things that conceptually should be elements. Unfortunately,
this severely hinders styling and customization of package "elements": Most
packages either use `.with(..)` overrides or expose some `state()`-based
solution for global configuration. Both of these solutions have problems:

- `.with(..)` only affects the current variable scope, it does not affect
  "elements" produced by some unrelated code. This reduces composability:
  Imagine that headings created by some package you use wouldn't be affected by
  your heading show rules.

- `state()`-based solutions are typically global: Styling things locally thus
  becomes more complex or impossible.

Both of these problems would be solved by set rules on custom elements. The most
direct way to integrate custom elements into Typst (as it is today), would be
custom element functions, with a syntax like `let element mything(..) = ..`.
However, upon closer inspection, functions aren't really the right concept to
model elements: Elements are _data_ and not _computations._ What we would write
on the right-hand side of an element function's definition is really the
**default show rule** of the element. So, what is the right tool to model
_data_? The answer to this is simple: Types.

By modelling elements as types instead of functions, I believe we can also clear
up a common confusion in Typst: Why can you `set` arguments on certain
functions, but not on others? The answer lies again in composability. Consider
the following snippet of markup:

```typ
#let it = heading[Hello]
#set heading(numbering: "1.")
#it
```

The heading stored in `it` is affected by the numbering set rule even though the
`heading` function was called before the set rule was in effect. This way, we
get our desired composability: A heading created by some package is affected by
our set and show rules even though it is independent of our local variable
scope.

Set rules do **not** simply pre-set an argument for the remainder of the scope.
Instead, they apply configuration to the subtree of content generated by the
scope they are in. They manipulate a _tree of data,_ not the
_flow of computation._ Because they manipulate elements, they only work for
arguments of element functions, not arguments of normal computational functions.

In a world where we model elements as types instead of functions, set rules thus
only work on types and not on functions. This is a much clearer distinction than
that of normal vs element functions. It's still not super trivial to understand
when a settable property can be observed on an value, but knowledge of this is
also typically only required for more advanced use cases.

## Types
As we discussed, elements are data, so it makes sense to model them as types
rather than functions. This design has the added benefit that custom types can
be generally useful for advanced scripting. Modelling an element as a type could
look like this:

```typ
#type heading {
  field level = 1
  field numbering = none
  field supplement = auto
  field outlined = true
  field bookmarked = auto
  field body

  // This is the default show rule for headings.
  // It can be overridden by `show heading: ..`.
  show: it => block({
    if it.numbering != none {
      counter(heading)
      h(0.3em, weak: true)
    }
    it.body
  })
}
```

Within a type definition, there would be fields, scoped bindings, and optionally
a default show rule.

1. Fields associate data with an instance of the type. They can have default
   values, which makes them optional to specify in the type's (automatically
   generated) constructor. Moreover, optional fields could be used with set
   rules of that type. Fields without default value would be required in the
   constructor and couldn't be used with set rules (it wouldn't make sense
   because they are always already inherently defined for each instance of the
   type).

2. Scoped bindings would become available in the type's scope. For example,
   `let zero = ..` would allow us to write `point.zero`. Similarly,
   `let add(..) = ..` would let us write `point.add(..)`. Moreover, functions in
   a type's scope could be called as _methods_ on instances of that type. We
   could write `a.add(b)` because `add` would be defined in the scope of
   `type(a)`. Here, `add` is a normal function. Methods wouldn't be a separate
   concept from functions, they would just be an alternative way to call a
   function in a type's scope. The argument names in `add` are also arbitrary,
   we could have also used `self` instead of `a` should we prefer that.

3. The type can have a default show rule that defines its visual presentation.
   If we omit that default show rule for the type, it becomes just its `repr`
   (i.e. its name and its fields).

Note that this design _can_ accomodate type hints down the road, but it doesn't
require them right away. A more classical type could look like this:

```typ
#type point {
  field x
  field y

  let zero = point(0, 0)
  let add(a, b) = point(a.x + b.x, a.y + b.y)
}

#let z = point.zero
#let a = point(2, 3)
#let b = point(1, 4)
#let r = point(3, 7)

#assert.eq(a.add(b), r)
#assert.eq(point.add(a, b), r)
```

If we model elements as normal types, certain things that were specific to
content now affect all values.

First, it would mean that any type can have set & show rules, not just special
elements. This makes possible some things that just don't work right now (which
is confusing to people): Right now, an integer or a float is eagerly converted
to text when it is interpolated into content. As a result, this conversion
cannot be affected by set rules (as discussed above, they can only affect the
transformation of the tree of elements, not immediate computation). This means
that things like setting the decimal separator with a set rule is not possible.
If the integer was retained as a value, however, and only converted to text
through its show rule, this problem would go away.

Second up is the question what happens to functions that currently take
`content`. Since anything can be displayed, these _could_ be changed to take
`any`. However, this means that functions that accept content _or_ some value
(like `auto` or `none`) would have somewhat nonsensical signatures like
`auto | any`. I'm not sure whether I consider this a big problem, but it's still
somewhat of an open question how we deal with that. We could also continue to
have a notion of `content` and restrict which types "implement that interface".

Third, are `location`s and `label`s. Supporting them on arbitrary values does
complicate things somewhat. Even an integer could have a label, which is
slightly crazy. But I think, overall it is not that problematic as long as we
implement it efficiently (i.e. keep the overhead minimal for values that _don't_
have a label.) It's also kinda nice if we can query for anything we label and
put into the document, even an integer. Locations fit in with some other
thoughts I had, so I will postpone talking about them for a bit.

## Context
As it stands, `locate`, `style`, and `layout` are three separate instances of
the same pattern: A function that takes a closure and returns content, which
evaluates the closure lazily and possibly multiple times. Precisely this is the
important aspect of them: While a normal block of code runs exactly once, code
wrapped in such a function can run never, just once, or more than one time.
Moreover, the arguments these functions provide (a `location`, a `styles`
object, and a `size` dictionary, respectively) may be different during each
invocation as they are _context-dependant._

The current setup is quite confusing for a number of reasons:

- Lack of conceptual generality: An experienced Typst user might see the
  conceptual parallelity of `locate`, `style`, and `layout`. A beginner,
  however, will not know about this. Because the callback architecture is
  currently a pattern rather than an actual language concept, there is no good
  place to document it and no good way to teach it.

- Bad diagnostics: People frequently try to write things like `let final =
  locate(loc => counter.final(loc)); #(final + 1)`. The compiler will then
  unhelpfully say that it could not add content and an integer.

- Confusing API: Some functions like `query` and `counter.final` take in a
  `location` parameter and then _they just discard it._ This parameter has the
  sole purpose of ensuring that the function is called within a `locate`
  context. Note that this restriction is **not** strictly necessary from a
  language-design perspective. It is motivated by implementation reasons: By
  encapsulating all queries in `locate` contexts, we can reduce the scope of
  incremental recomputations from a whole module to a small block of code. If we
  would allow top-level queries, things like module exports could depend on
  queries, meaning a module wouldn't be a well-defined self-contained entity
  without an introspection context.

I believe that the fundamental problem is not how these things
_work internally,_ but how we _expose_ them. My proposal is the following:

- We introduce the explicit notion of _contextual functions._ Such functions
  depend on some piece of information that differs across the document and as
  such they cannot run without an established context. The documentation clearly
  marks them as contextual and states what piece of context they depend on.

- We introduce a `context` expression. This expression wraps another expression
  and provides context to it _implicitly._ When you call a contextual function
  outside of an established context, the compiler produces a helpful error
  message with the hint to use a context expression. A context expression's
  return value is an opaque contextual value that can be placed into the
  document, yielding different output depending on the context. If you try to
  use a contextual value for normal computation, the compiler produces a helpful
  error message and links to an explanation.

Consider this piece of code:

```typ
#locate(loc => {
  style(styles => {
    let last = query(heading, loc).last()
    let size = measure(last.body, styles)
    [Width is #size.width]
  })
})
```

Using a context expression, this would look like this:

```typ
#context {
  let last = query(heading).last()
  let size = measure(last.body)
  [Width is #size.width]
}
```

Implementation-wise not that much has changed. User-facing, it is quite
different though:
- We can omit the `loc` argument `query`
- We can omit the `styles` argument to `measure`
- We have only a single nesting level instead of two
- The expression is syntactically less noisy than one or even two nested
  closures.

The motivation for `context` expressions this doesn't quite end here though. As
we discussed before, settable properties affect an element where it is _used,_
not were it is created. This means the value of a settable property is
contextual. A "get rule" can thus only work within an established context.
Currently, it could be implemented roughly like this:

```typ
#style(styles => styles.get(text).fill)
```

Compare this with a `context` expression:

```typ
#context text.fill
```

Particularly for this case, it is very useful to have the context implicit
instead of explicit because it greatly reduces the syntactical overhead. And
there is one more nice trick: Because contextual values would be a first-class
language concept, we could potentially also allow contextual values in other
places that can deal with them:

```typ
// make text darker
#set text(fill: context text.fill.darken(20%))
```

Just like `context` could be _used_ in a few more places like that, context
could also be _provided_ by other places: Show rules, for instance, run once per
occurance of a value in the document. Thus, they could just as well provide
context, saving us an extra context expression.

Similarly, numberings could be smartly resolved with the correct context. Right
now, there is the following [tricky bug](https://github.com/typst/typst/issues/1057):
If you define a numbering that internally displays another counter, that counter
will show different values depending on where the numbering is applied: In the
table of contents, in a reference, etc. We could fix this problem by letting
these places provide the correct context.

### Locations
Let me come back to locations now. These are somewhat "magic" as an opaque type
that gives access to page, x, and y. Perhaps they feel magic because of their
naming. They are named after how they are used, not what they really are. If you
dig down into the inner workings, a location is really just a **unique ID** for
an element. If you write `locate(loc => ..)`, then you get back a `LocateElem`
which holds a unique ID. If you query semantic elements like headings, you get
access to their unique IDs.

Now note that labels are also sort of IDs, just not necessarily unique. I think
there is some potential for unification here. We could merge labels and unique
IDs: Let Typst generate a unique label and then combine it with a normal named
label. Such merged labels would be useful in abstractions that consist of fixed
elements that need labels for some automation, but the whole thing might appear
multiple times in a document. If we just use normal labels, there is a collision
between these instances that we need to handle, and it also might collide with
user-defined labels.

Interestingly enough, this concept _is_ already used internally in the compiler.
The `Location` type has a `.variant(index: usize)` method for attaching a
well-known location to a generated element. This is used for two-way-linking
between citations and bibliography references without tons of back-and-forth
introspection.

Getting back to context expressions: A function that generates a unique label
for us could be just yet another contextual function. The `location` method on
content would be superseded by a function that takes a value and returns its
unique ID (if present) as a label. And to get access to `page`, `x`, `y` we
would have yet another contextual function that takes a label (or a value with a
unique label) and gives its position. And the perfect name for that function is
`locate`. :)

```typ
#context {
  let elem = query(heading).first()
  let (x, y) = locate(elem)
  [Heading is at (#x, #y)!]
}
```

### Async/await?
I would like to emphasize once more the central observation: Context values are
**not** special because they depend on context that is not available when normal
code runs. Rather, they are special because **the code defining the contextual
value may need to run multiple times for different contexts.** This makes it
distinctly different from something like async/await, where computation is
delayed, but still happens just once. While the return value of a `context`
expression is _sort of_ like a `Promise` or `Future`, it is different because it
may run multiple times. (I'm not sure how this relates to algebraic effects.
From my limited understanding, they do allow for multiple resumptions. I am not
sure how they fit into this, perhaps this is sort of an algebraic effect.)

While we're at async/await: In theory, we could have syntactic sugar to unnest
context and basically pull the remaining scope into a `context` block. This
would be akin to implicit awaiting. However, I do not think this is a good idea
for three reasons:

1. It would mean that any function dealing with contextual things internally
would also return a contextual value. It would not be possible to have e.g. a
function that returns an array of contextual values.

2. By trying to hide what code may run multiple times, it makes it harder to
reason about the interaction of different pieces of code. When a computation
diverges into a code segment that may run multiple times, can it ever converge
again? Even if algebraic effects are some kind of silver bullet, I don't see how
they could fix that. (I would be happy to stand corrected though!)

3. It hurts efficiency and incremental compilation: Think back to why `query`
currently takes a `location` parameter to reduce the amount of things it can
effect. Allowing top-level desugared context runs into the same issue where a
whole module becomes context-dependent. And even if we only allow context access
within a function (akin to no top-level await), which would be even more
confusing in my opinion, the scope might still be a lot larger than necessary.

## Recap
That's it. Here's what we talked about:
- What elements are and why we care
- How we can model elements as types
- How methods become associated functions
- The consequences of values and elements being one and the same
- How context expression can simplify introspection
- A context-based design for "get rules" with minimal syntactical overhead
- Why contextual code is special and different from async/await
